Sychangco 1
This essay, “Open and Closed Media: Instagram, Discord, and a Delicate Balance”, takes
a deep dive into open and closed media. In it, I use two apps I am familiar with - Instagram and
Discord - to define and represent both sides. The benefits and negatives of each social media
type are analyzed, as are how users interact with the media and how users are affected
emotionally. I wrote the essay in a way that interweaves both directions of technological impact
into an optimistic, encouraging argument. The argument culminates in a direct, straightforward
proposal for the social media companies. This proposal is mainly directed toward Instagram’s
parent company Meta, and within the essay I tried to remain as neutral as possible to not anger
any company employees that could be reading my essay. I believe my genuine anecdotes, factual
analysis, and main message that is akin to a call to action make this essay a cohesive, powerful
critique of social media.
Sychangco 2
Ethan Sychangco
Professor Coad
English 1A: CTW 1
4 Nov 2022
Open and Closed Media: Instagram, Discord, and a Delicate Balance
From the comfort of their screen, a person can communicate with billions of registered
users right this moment. That is a staggering amount more than a person can talk to in a typical
face-to-face conversation. The ability to talk with such an enormous audience was once
considered impossible, but it is now a reality thanks to social media applications. As a current
college student, I am riding the social media wave lightly. After being an avid text messenger
and Discord user for several years, I recently signed up for an Instagram account. When I signed
up, though, I realized how different it was from the direct messages I was used to.
I divide social media into two distinct structures: open media and closed media. Open
media involves user content intended to be seen by the entire world or a wide audience, with
defining apps like Twitter, TikTok, and recently Instagram for me. By contrast, closed media is
defined by user content intended for a select audience - as small as a single person - and this is
where texts, emails, and my favorite messaging app, Discord, are categorized. Each app employs
its own psychological tactics to keep people glued to their screens, and open media is arguably
the worst offender. However, getting users addicted is not the only thing these apps do. When
used excessively and separately, the human mind is bound to suffer from social media. But when
a delicate balance is made between both categories, open and closed media can actually work
together to augment a person’s life. To make this balance attainable, social media companies
Sychangco 3
need to change their development methods, placing users first and letting them strike the delicate
balance necessary for healthy social media usage.
Likes, views, followers, friends, and subscribers are only some of the defining
mainstream terms of open media. Dozens of apps have characterized this category since the
dawn of the internet, and currently I best associate open media with Instagram. It is an app with a
design similar to other “social networking sites or services (SNS)... [platforms] used to build and
maintain social relations among people who share interests, activities, backgrounds, or real-life
connections” (Khan). At face value, this service appears full of convenience and opportunity. I
can make one public post to easily keep loved ones informed and spark interaction with my
distant friends. The focus on publicity also allows for incredible statistics, and some Instagram
superstars have built entire careers from millions of followers. Even the ill have reason to join, as
“patients can join virtual communities, participate in research, receive financial or moral support,
set goals, and track personal progress” (Ventola). Instagram and open media apps have many
practical uses, with something available for almost everyone in the world. Unfortunately, though,
not everyone follows the positive path painted by these apps’ marketers. Whether intentionally or
subconsciously, we are playing by developers’ numbers and falling into trolls’ traps.
More often than not, using open media is like fighting an uphill battle against its inner
systems and adverse audiences. First, the algorithms. Behind the scenes, developers engineer
these complex programs that completely govern how we consume and post on social media.
They are, for example, why “you only see a portion of your friends’ posts on your… [social
media] Feed” (Wachter-Boettcher 144). Regardless of how casually or seriously a user treats
open media, they must deal with the algorithm to have their posts seen by the right people. On
several occasions, I have felt out of the loop after not seeing my friend’s Instagram post; I
Sychangco 4
thought of where it should have appeared, and in its place was a strange workout advertisement
chosen by the algorithm. Eventually, after enough instances of improper posts, open media starts
feeling like a losing battle against an unbeatable artificial intelligence. This negative experience
is far from healthy, especially when it compounds on the emotional pain that not-so-nice users
bring. Scattered around open media’s expansive audience are toxic trolls that users are exposed
to and must defend against. Trolls are people who intentionally try to hurt others’ feelings online,
saying terrible things that range from “rape and death threats to suggestions of suicide to…
telling a woman, ‘I would love to knock you… out’” (Wachter-Boettcher 148). Though I haven’t
been a victim yet, I have seen trolls in action on several open media apps, including once on
Instagram. I also know, from confronting a bully in elementary school, that toxicity strikes deep
in the mind. When confronted by trolls, users can either ignore them and hurt their self-esteem,
or question everything to fight back. But words of defense, fueled by emotion in the moment,
can take the form of one-liners and insults that are just as toxic, further worsening the mood.
Open media, marketed as a convenient way to reach billions of people, sometimes feels like a pit
of desolation when its negatives are considered.
Constant pressure from algorithms and toxic users can be too much to handle for some
people, and this is where closed media comes in. Emails, text messages, and my preferred app
Discord, which combines a system similar to IRC (internet relay chat) with VOIP (voice over
internet), are the exact opposite of open media. Messages to others are confidential by default,
and the latter app is quite the powerful suite: “Discord gives you the power to create an
invite-only home for your friends or community - a place where you can talk, hang out, and have
fun.” (Librarian). With its focus on small conversations for select people, closed media seems to
be a perfect haven for productive, reliable, and even professional chatting. I know who I am
Sychangco 5
talking to in most chats, there is no algorithm rolling dice on message visibility, and it is easier to
keep trolls out of my server when they must be explicitly invited. They can also be a fantastic
way to build communications foundations, as formal messaging in particular requires
consideration of the recipient, word choice, and more. There are several positives linked to
virtual conversations, however exclusivity doesn’t prevent other issues from arising.
Closed media disrespects our privacy in its own flashy way, and it builds relationships
that can come crashing down painfully. One particularly problematic issue is push notifications,
which attempt to alert people about events in real time. Often, notifications are initially set to
intrusive default settings (such as “notify me for every new message”) and it is difficult to tune
them to our liking because “finding out what [settings] you were agreeing to took extra clicks…
[into] complicated privacy settings” (Wachter-Boettcher 109). Most people find traversing menus
filled with dozens or even hundreds of options a great hassle. Overwhelmed and discouraged,
they end up not interacting with the settings at all. As a result, the app is free to flood users with
constant alerts, continuously reminding and pressuring them to return to their virtual
conversation. I have experienced this on Discord, where each message from an active friend
group server caused my phone to buzz and light up, severely crippling my ability to focus. While
disruptive notifications are fixable with some knowledge and button presses, such as how I made
Discord quiet down after some research, it is not the only problem. Closed media also fosters a
mindset that is often reluctant to meet new people, which can come back to haunt them. I
personally dread texting the wrong number, emailing the wrong address, and introducing myself
to a group that has already established who’s friends with whom. Such emotions are real
motivators that encourage me to chat only with the few people I know well. This is great for
developing the aforementioned communication skills, but a liability for the future. Two years
Sychangco 6
ago, on Discord again, I was a victim of “ghosting”, an act where “someone cuts off all online
communication with someone else, and without an explanation. Instead, like a ghost, they just
vanish” (Dubar). The person who did this was a close online friend, and after being ghosted by
him, I felt an emotional void for several days. The stronger the relationship, the harder it falls,
and because communication on closed media revolves around strong relationships, the emotional
void from a severed Discord friendship can last agonizingly long. In this situation, if I did not
have any additional friends to cheer me up, I would have been in a terrible state of mind for far
too long. Together, closed media’s notification functions and encouraged behaviors prove to be
problematic for users, a strikingly similar trend to its open counterpart.
If both open and closed media appear to be full of despair and hatred, the optimal strategy
would be to completely distance oneself from it. But that isn’t possible anymore because of
social media’s enormous reach and relevance: “in 2020, there are an estimated 3.8 billion social
media users worldwide, representing half the global population” (Naslund). Disconnection is not
an option because of everyday reliance on social media. So, users must find a way to stay online
while dealing with the problems. Many of the issues mentioned can be mitigated in two ways:
using both types of social media together, and spending less time online overall. For example, I
can sharpen my conversational skills by respectfully talking to Discord users and simultaneously
open up to the world on Instagram. The algorithms of open media foster discovery, while closed
messaging provides reliability in communication. Time spent on social media is also a significant
factor in its impact. The less time I spend online, the fewer chances online bullies and distracting
notifications have to affect my mind. Altogether, the best strategy is to strike a delicate balance
between open versus closed media and excessive versus minute usage. Together, it becomes
Sychangco 7
harder for social media to throw users into despair because its specific flaws are counterbalanced
and its time-based tricks can’t keep up.
Spreading moderate attention over multiple apps is an excellent habit to build up, but tech
companies for open media disagree. They make their apps as addictive as possible, refusing to
resolve predatory design choices so that they can further two particular business agendas. First,
developers strive to increase “daily active users (DAUs) and monthly active users (MAUs)
because the more often users return... the happier those designers’ bosses (and their companies’
investors) are” (Wachter-Boettcher 74). Business-wise, these acronyms mean so much, and
companies often strive to make these statistics rise at all costs. Instagram’s parent company,
Meta, prides themselves on their massive user base that logs in daily and keeps on scrolling.
Even though they obtained their audience chiefly through algorithmic manipulation and time
sinking features, like the endless videos of “Reels”, they still focus on and feel proud of their
numbers. By keeping users online, Meta can proceed with their next agenda, where they keep
users “clicking and tapping... while, just outside the screen, they flout regulations, steal data, and
keep oppressive systems intact” (Wachter-Boettcher 99). They have a clear focus: data, profit,
and self-fulfillment. Meta and related companies repeatedly disregard end users, instead focusing
on gathering valuable digital items that push them up in the business world. The unrelenting
focus on company growth is the root of many previously mentioned design problems. If this
focus were eliminated, exiting an app may not prove to be as difficult.
Fortunately for open media developers, there is a way to rid apps of these wrongdoings:
following closed media’s footsteps. The best example by far is the company Slack, which creates
a messaging service similar to Discord for business and “asks [their] designers to close their eyes
and imagine what a person might have experienced in their life before sitting down at their desk”
Sychangco 8
(Wachter-Boettcher 190). This caring mentality propelled Slack to great success, and other
companies, including Discord, have started to engage in similar behavior. After Discord changed
their logo and color scheme, I found the company constantly doubling down on developing
functions that help users create the perfect home for their friends. Improved notification settings,
Nitro’s reasonable premium service, and strong community server tools demonstrate their
commitment for their users. Afterward, just like Slack, they only continued to grow and grow. It
seems so simple to focus on user friendliness, but recent history shows that it is the optimal path
toward both happy users and solid business.
The best course of action for any person looking to involve themselves with social media
is to invest equally in open and closed media. Connect with the wider audience on Instagram
while staying close to a tightly-knit Discord server, as I did. Each app and category has its flaws,
some worse than others, but if people can balance their usage, then social media apps can
become essential parts of people’s lives. Right now, it is difficult to make this balance because
several companies, especially developers of open media like Meta, are trying to keep users
online as long as possible. This must stop. Their new strategy should be to place users over
profits, doing so via helpful design choices free from unscrupulous intent. This change in belief
has been demonstrated before; it can be as simple as Discord’s journey, in which the company
got inspired then focused their efforts accordingly. When this occurs, when developers
consistently focus on their users with genuine efforts to make social media functional and
effective, benefits will blossom. Along with the steady, reliable business growth that honest
methods invoke, the best value will come to the people. When social media companies prioritize
the user experience, people will have the opportunity to strike the delicate balance of social
media usage, thereby allowing them to become healthy users of open and closed media.
Sychangco 9
Works Cited
Dubar, Royette. “When Texts Suddenly Stop: Why People Ghost on Social Media.” The
Conversation, 16 June 2022,
theconversation.com/when-texts-suddenly-stop-why-people-ghost-on-social-media-1719
32.
Househ, Mowafa, et al. “Empowering Patients through Social Media: The Benefits and
Challenges.” Sage Journals, 18 Feb. 2014,
journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1460458213476969.
Khan, Gohar Feroz, et al. “Social Media Risks and Benefits: A Public Sector Perspective.” Sage
Journals, 30 Mar. 2014, journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0894439314524701.
Librarian. “Beginner's Guide to Discord.” Discord Support, May 2022,
support.discord.com/hc/en-us/articles/360045138571-Beginner-s-Guide-to-Discord.
Naslund, John A., et al. “Social Media and Mental Health: Benefits, Risks, and Opportunities for
Research and Practice.” SpringerLink, Springer International Publishing, 20 Apr. 2020,
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s41347-020-00134-x.
Wachter-Boettcher, Sara. Technically Wrong: Sexist Apps, Biased Algorithms, and Other Threats
of Toxic Tech. W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2018.
Ventola, C. Lee. “Social Media and Health Care Professionals: Benefits, Risks, and Best
Practices.” PubMed Central, Pharmacy and Therapeutics (P & T), July 2014,
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4103576/.